The opening book text file itself is an ASCII text file that you can edit
with any text editor. Besides plain ASCII, also UTF-8 with and without BOM
(byte order mark) are supported.

Whitespaces may be space characters or tabs.

Allowed are:
- leading whitespaces in a line.
- more than one whitespace between two moves.
- lines without moves (empty or whitespace only or comments).

It is line based, and each line goes like this:

e2e4 e7e5 g1f3 b8c6 f1b5 (Spanish Opening)

You always give the origin and destination square of a move. Capturing moves
do not require any special markup, not even for en passant. Castling is done
as a pure king move. A white kingside castling thus is "e1g1". The rook
relocation is implied automatically.

En passant caputures work although the en passant square is not being tracked
in the position CRC itself. Within the CT800's opening book logics, the
suggested opening book moves are matched against the list of legal moves.
So if en passant is in the book for a certain position CRC without being
possible on the board, this move will not be selected.

Pawn promotions to queens work because the queen promotion is assumed
implicitely. Also for a promotion pawn move, is it just from-to notation.
Attaching the promotion piece to the move is not allowed. E.g. a black pawn
on c2 that captures a white piece on b1 and is promoted to a queen is noted
as "c2b1". Writing it as "c2b1q" will yield a syntax error.

Underpromotions are not possible.

You can mark a move with a following '?' so that the program passively knows
how to continue if the opponent plays that move, but it will never play that
move by itself.

Another marker with the same consequence is 'x' instead of '?', which is
used to mark moves that actually are playable, but avoided because the line
results in positions that don't suit the software. The 'x' marker might be
used for some kind of "wide" opening book in the future, though that is not
planned to be implemented as of now.

E.g. if you don't want the program to play King's Gambit, but tell it how to
react in case the opponent plays it:

e2e4 e7e5 f2f4? ...

Comments at the line end must start with '('. The rest of the line will be
ignored, so the closing ')' bracket is just cosmetics. If a line contains
only a comment, you can use '#' as first character.

The opening book compiler transforms the line based format into a position
based one. This means that once you reach a position that already has been
treated at the end of another variation, the same continuation applies.

Example:

d2d4 g7g6 e2e4 f8g7 ...
e2e4 g7g6 d2d4

In the second line, you don't need to continue because the position that is
reached after the e2e4 in the first line is the same as after d2d4 in the
second line. So if the variation of the second line happens, the following
move Bf8-g7 will apply automatically also in the second line.